---
title: 'MFEM-MGIS-MFRONT, a HPC mini-application targeting nonlinear thermo-mechanical simulations of nuclear fuels at mesoscale'
tags:
  - thermo-mechanical
  - HPC
  - mfem
  - nuclear fuel
authors:
  - name: Thomas Helfer
    orcid: 0000-0000-0000-0000
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Guillaume Latu
    orcid: 0000-0000-0000-0000
    equal-contrib: false
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Maxence Wangermez
    orcid: 0000-0000-0000-0000
    equal-contrib: false
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Raphaël Prat
    orcid: 0000-0000-0000-0000
    equal-contrib: false
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: DES/IRESNE/DEC/SESC, CEA, France
   index: 1
date: 3 August 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
---


# Summary



# Statement of need

The MFEM-MGIS-MFRONT mini-application (abbreviated version MMM), aims at
efficiently use supercomputers in the field of implicit nonlinear
thermomechanics. This open-source library is based on several components as
prerequisites. The first component, MFEM [1,6], is a finite element library
designed for current supercomputers but also for the upcoming exascale
supercomputers. It provides many useful features for carrying out realistic
simulations: support for curvilinear meshes, high order approximation spaces
and different families of finite elements, interfaces to several types of
parallel solvers (including matrix-free ones), preconditioners, and native
support for adaptive non-conforming mesh refinement (AMR).  Originating from
the applied mathematics and parallel computing communities, MFEM offers both
performance and a large panel of advanced mathematical features. In particular,
one can easily switch from one linear solver to another (direct or iterative),
which is essential for the targeted application: microstructure and mesoscale
modelling for nuclear fuel. However, applications to solid mechanics in MFEM
are mostly limited to simple constitutive equations such as elasticity and
hyperelasticity, which is insufficient.  The aim of the MMM project is to
combine MFEM with the MFrontGenericInterfaceSupport (MGIS) project [4,8], an
open-source C++ library that provides convenient data structures to support
arbitrarily complex nonlinear constitutive equations generated by the
open-source MFront code generator [2,5]. This library handles all the kinds of
behaviour supported by MFront. In the field of nonlinear mechanics, this
encompasses arbitrary complex behaviours that can describe damage, plasticity,
viscoplasticity, phase change in small and finite strain analyses. Generalised
behaviours such as strongly coupled thermomechanical behaviours, variational
approaches to fracture, Cosserat media are supported by MGIS and will be
considered in future versions of MMM.  Thanks to the coupling with MGIS and
MFront and specific developments made, MMM has added the following mechanical
features compared to pure MFEM approach: – Ability to handle several materials
which distinct constitutive equations.  – Support for internal state variables
(defined at quadrature points).  – Support for complex boundary conditions
specific to nonlinear mechanics.  – Support for post-processing specific to
nonlinear mechanics.  – Integration with the Salomé platform, support of the
MED mesh [12] file format on input and export of results in the same format on
output.  The implementation of high order meshes or finite elements is easy.
The library tackles some peculiarities of nonlinear mechanics. In particular,
the support of complex constitutive laws and the management of advanced
boundary conditions.  The MMM library [7] is written in C++-17 language and
provides a very high level of abstraction based on a very declarative
text-based Application Programming Interface. In the future, python bindings
will be also considered to improve the user experience.


# Mechnanics Features

- Periodic evolution problems
	- .
- Post Processings
	- .

# High Performance Computing (HPC)

# Numerical results

Some examples are available in the open-source github: `https://github.com/latug0/mfem-mgis-examples`

- Snass
- REV of MOX3 for nuclear simulations
- Polycristal


# Conclusion

The MMM mini-app is a new HPC modelling software. Based on an open-source
software stack, it allows for the fine representation of microstructure in full
3D in the field of fuel modelling. On the one hand, MGIS and MFRONT bring
nonlinear mechanics features such as damage, plasticity, viscoplasticity
capabilities. On the other hand, MFEM provides advanced finite elements schemes
and parallel performance (tested on several thousands of cores until now).
Open-source approach was chosen mainly to: promote collaboration, improve
reproducibility, and reduce costs for development and maintenance.

# Citations



# help


## Objectives of MFEM-MGIS-MFRONT mini-application


## Motivations for an open-source framework

The mini-app takes full advantage of an open-source software (OSS) stack. It
benefits from the increasing maturity of many communities and tools working
together. Thus, within MFEM, one has many available choices to set the linear
solver, such as: Hypre, PETSc, MUMPS, SuperLU, UMFPACK or other ones. Likewise,
several preconditioners, partitioning libraries, or input mesh formats can be
activated and used. Combinations are highly configurable and almost all
external libraries are switchable. To handle the numerous accessible
combinations, Spack is really a cornerstone. This package manager simplifies
building, installing, customizing, and sharing HPC software stacks. It provides
a simple way for installing packages with cumbersome structures and lots of
dependencies. Spack is an open-source package manager developed and maintained
by community of HPC developers. Our setup that combines OSS allows for a fast
and cheap access to advanced features embedded in the underlying libraries. At
the beginning of MMM mini-app, a preliminary study considering several
potential finite element libraries leads us to the conclusion that choosing the
right open-source stack was a key point. For example, to achieve both
performance and keep low maintenance/development costs, one should ensure that
components of the software stack can connect well with each other, and offer a
high degree of controllability. One must also looks at the maturity of each
library and the quality of technical support proposed. The responsiveness of
the support is important and is often related to the size of the community
behind each software. Coding practices, documentation and expected durability
of the libraries have also to be considered. Then, pondering all these points
in our analysis, assessing the risks and in estimating the potential gains, we
chose the most suitable software stack serving our purpose.  Compared to closed
source development that we might have considered, OSS brings regular bug
fixing, peer review of code by many developers, a community that tests and
improves the software frequently. The proposed services such as error
reporting, bug tracker, forum for user requests and offered support help a lot
for speeding up the development process and shortening maintenance actions.
High-performance simulations suffer from difficulties for ensuring exact
numerical reproducibility. Numerical results that are not reproducible make it
difficult to assess the methods and novelties a given software produces. In
addition to that, the available publications typically lack the level of detail
that is required to reproduce simulations. Also, with prototype realizations
often remaining private, other people are unable to track the code. Then, one
should find ways to improve this issue. Several reasons explains why
reproducibility is difficult: floating-point arithmetic peculiarities,
non-determinism of parallel calculations, complex software stacks, closed
source software. The two first points are well beyond the scope of this
contribution. However, the last two points can be partially solved with
open-source solutions. Hence, assembling software, connecting tools together
into pipelines, and specifying parameters can be handled. Existing tools can
automate a series of processes. For MMM, we choose to rely on Spack to
completely organize and setup the versions of the different libraries composing
the stack. Furthermore, the CMake tool helped us to achieve reproducible builds
across multiple computers and systems. A set of reference solutions has also
been designed. Then, we can check on any new target machine if MMM gives
correct results using Spack and CMake. Verification through defined standard
examples ensure quite fast deployment, these examples also serve as
documentation for users of the code. It is also foreseen that we supplement the
current strategy with a continuous integration platform to further improve the
robustness of the mini-app.

Open-source approach enable transparency, accessibility, and replicability
among contributors of a single code. Modelling effort can include participants
with different domain expertise. This diversity of contributions really helps
building up software that combine state-of-the-art numerical methods.  Our goal
is to establish international collaborations with privileged partners and with
academics around MMM. In this context, open-source approach is fostering a
greater adoption of the software product. We also expect that this solution can
favour external contributions and promote collaborations focusing on grain and
subgrain-resolved microstructure for nuclear fuel modelling.

## Numerical results
Installation and deployment on desktop or large computers is based on the Spack
package manager [10]. With MMM, we were able to carry out a multi-material
elastic modelling on computing clusters. Scalability performance is good on a
few thousands of CPU cores. Despite the very high level of abstraction and the
genericness of MMM (multi-material and arbitrary behaviours), the overhead
appears reasonably limited, roughly 30% compared to a pure MFEM version which
provides very optimised and specialised kernels (this was tested on an elastic
setting with 2 materials). The presentation will show some of the current
capabilities of the software.


FIG. 1. Periodic mesh generated by the GMSH mesher, model of 544 inclusions (polydisperse) within a periodic Representative Volume Element.

FIG. 2. Elastic modelling of two materials with different characteristics: a large matrix containing many inclusions. Displacements in x direction (from left to right direction) are shown.

For several use cases, MMM has good strong scaling performance.We have
canducted benchmarks on two testbeds: Marseille supercomputing center (up to
512 cores) and CEA/CCRT center (up to 2000 cores). Up to now we have been
considering calculations of periodic micro-structures dedicated to the study of
the behavior of nuclear fuels [3, 9]. Presently, grain and subgrain-resolved
microstructure models are the main targets of the code, see Fig. 1 and 2 for a
result of a simulation conducted with MMM on a Representative Volume Element.
This require to be able to handle periodic boundary conditions at reasonable
cost, which is achieved thanks to MFEM that embeds a customized elimination
methods (modification of the global stiffness matrix). Simulation approaches
that explicitly take all relevant microstructural details into account are the
only modelling approaches that have sufficient predictive capability for
several applications related to the nuclear fuel field at mesoscale. For such
requirements, we need computationally fast and robust numerical algorithm to
handle 3D volumes. But we require also physics-based constitutive models that
are able dealing with complex microstructure in full 3D. MMM has been designed
recently to reach exactly this goal and to tackle large systems with several
million unknowns or even a few billion.

References
[1] ANDERSON R. & al. “MFEM : A modular finite element methods library”. Computers and Mathematics with Applications (2021) 81:42–74. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0898122120302583 
[2] CEA and EDF. TFEL/MFront. URL: https://tfel.sourceforge.net/
[3] ESNOUL C., LARGENTON R. & al. “Studying fuel failure behavior with a micromechanical approach”. The 12th World Congress on Computational Mechanics (Proc. WCCM 12, 2016). URL: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01474287
[4] HELFER T., BLEYER J. & al.. The ‘MFrontGenericInterfaceSupport‘ project. The Open Journal (2003) 5-48. URL: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.02003 
[5] HELFER T., BRUNO M. & al. “Introducing the open-source MFront code generator : Application to mechanical behaviours and material knowledge management within the PLEIADES fuel element modelling platform”.Computers and Mathematics with Applications  (2015) 70-5:994–1023. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0898122115003132
[6] MFEM : Modular finite element methods [Software]. URL: https://mfem.org
[7] The MFEM-MGIS project [Software]. URL: https://github.com/thelfer/mfem-mgis
[8] The MFrontGenericInterfaceSupport project [Software]. URL: https://github.com/thelfer/MFrontGenericInterfaceSupport
[9] PORTELETTE L. & al. “Athermal dislocation strengthening in UO2”. Journal of Nuclear Materials (2020). URL: https://hal. archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02938715.
[10] Spack package manager [Software]. URL: https://spack.io/
[11] BIGOT J., LATU G. et al. “An approach to increase reliability of HPC simulation, application to the Gysela5D code” Esaim: Proceedings (2016) 53:248-270.URL: https://www.esaim-proc.org/articles/proc/pdf/2016/01/proc165315.pdf 
[12] CEA and EDF. Salomé platform [Software]. URL: https://www.salome-platform.org/user-section/about/med 


